CEC – Central Electronic Complex
CMC – Central Management Complex
CPU – Central Processing Unit
PU – Processor Units
CP – Central Processor

IFL – Integrated Facility for Linux
	run various distributions of Linux, plus OpenSolaris

ICF – Integrated Coupling Facility
	used to manage data and distribute workload among z/OS systems in a parallel sysplex

SAP – System Assist Processor
	dedicated I/O processor (one included with each box; extras rarely needed)

zAAP – System z Application Assist Processor
	used on z990/z890 through zEC12/zBC12 to handle Java workloads under z/OS

zIIP – System z Integrated Information Processor
	used on z9EC/z9BC through current to handle selected (originally mostly DB2) and later also Java workloads under z/OS
	zIIPs no longer available with z13


The central processor box contains the processors, memory, control circuits and channel interfaces
	Early systems had up to 16 channels
	modern systems have 1024 (256 * 4 Logical Channel Subsystems)


In the early design, the device address was physically related.
This addressing scheme is still in use today only virtualized

address: 132
 	first(1) channel number
 	second(3) control unit number
 	third(2) device number


Parallel channel
The maximum data rate up to 4.5 MB, the maximum distance up to 122 meters.
These specifications can be limited by the connected control units and devices.


The central processor box contains the processors, memory, control circuits, and interfaces for channels.
A channel provides an independent data and control path between I/O devices and memory.

->Channels connect to control units
A control unit contains logic to work with a particular type of I/O device. 
Today’s channel paths are dynamically attached to control units as the workload demands. 
Devices is not defined, but it is usually more economical to place most of the circuitry in the control unit.


->Control units connect to devices (disk drives, tape drives, communication interfaces)

CEC new design includes
	- CEC modular componentry
	- I/O housing
	- I/O connectivity
	- I/O operation
	- Partitioning of the system


Most modern mainframes use switches(dynamically connected) between the channels and the control units. 



ESCON - Enterprise Systems Connection
	is a data connection created by IBM commonly
	 used to connect their mainframe computers to peripheral devices.
	 replaced the older, slower parallel Bus&Tag channel technology
	 use a director to support dynamic switching
	 providing peripheral sharing
	 Replaced by newer FICON technology

FICON - Fiber Connectivity
	the next generation high-speed input/output (I/O) interface

ESCON vs FICON
ESCON
   - 20 Mbytes / Second
   - Lots of “dead time”.  One active request at a time.
   -  One target control unit
	
FICON
  - 400 Mbytes / Second, moving to 800
  - Uses FCP standard
  - Fiber Optic cable (less space under floor)
  - Currently, up to 64 simultaneous “I/O packets” at a time with up to 64 different control units
  - Supports Cascading switches



MIF - Multiple Image Facility
	for sharing channels among LPARs

CHPID addresses are two hex digits (FF / 256)
Multiple partitions can share CHPIDs (MIF)
I/O subsystem layer exists between the operating system and the CHPIDs



I/O control
	es a control file IOCDS that translates physical I/O addresses into device numbers
	Device numbers are assigned by the system programmer when creating the IODF and IOCDS and are arbitrary (but not random!)
	three or four hex digits (modern machines)


Each Logical Channel Subsystem has a set of Subchannels 


System Control and Partitioning
LPARs - independent logical partitions (Memory)
Each LPAR supports an independent operating system (OS) loaded by a separate initial program load (IPL) operation.


Logical Partitions (LPARs) or Servers
A system programmer can assign different operating environments to each partition with isolation
An LPAR can be assigned a number of dedicated or shared processors.
Each  LPAR can have different storage (CSTOR) assigned depending on workload requirements.
The I/O channels (CHPIDs)  are assigned either statically or dynamically as needed by server workload.
Provides an opportunity to consolidate distributed environments to a centralized location

CSTOR - central storage
	in past literature may also be referred to as main storage, provides the system with directly addressable, fast-access electronic storage of data.


Characteristics of LPARs
LPARs are the equivalent of a separate mainframe for most practical purposes
Each LPAR runs its own operating system
Devices can be shared across several LPARs
Processors can be dedicated or shared
When shared each LPAR is assigned a number of logical processors (up to the maximum number of physical processors)
Each LPAR is independent